In this video we'll learn about a specific type of virtual function called a pure virtual function and
how it lets us create abstract classes before we learn about pure virtual functions.
Let's see what an abstract class is an abstract class is a class that cannot be instantiated.
So if we have an abstract class shape then we cannot directly instantiate shape objects.
You might be thinking.
So what good is a class like that.
Well abstract classes are used as base classes in inheritance hierarchies and they're often referred
to as abstract base classes.
So what do we call classes that you can instantiate from these classes are called concrete classes.
And those are the ones that we've been using all along in this course.
All of their member functions must be to find examples of these classes might be a checking account
and a savings account in an account hierarchy of faculty and staff classes in the employee hierarchy
and enemy and level bosses in a player hierarchy and abstract base class is usually too generic to be
useful to directly derive objects from.
But it serves as a parent to be derived from.
And those could be concrete classes.
So in an account hierarchy we're providing savings accounts checking accounts and trust accounts.
But do we ever provide just an account.
Probably not.
If a customer walked in and said they'd like to open an account they'd be asked what type of account
they'd like to open.
So we would never really have account objects directly instantiated in our system.
We would have checking accounts savings accounts or trust accounts.
So the account class can be thought of as a general class that's the parent to all of the classes.
The same can be said for the player class in a player hierarchy and the Employee class in a university
personnel system.
In order for a class to be an abstract base class it must contain at least one pure virtual function.
So let's see what a pure virtual function is a pure virtual function is a virtual function that you
use to make a class abstract.
We declare pure virtual functions just like virtual functions but we add the equals zero after the prototype.
Typically pure virtual functions don't have any implementation since it's really up to the derived concrete
classes to define this behavior.
But it is possible to give them an implementation in the code snippet in the slide you can see that
we declared a pure virtual function named function whatever class this function is declared in is now
an abstract class and cannot be instantiated.
So we see that a pure virtual function makes a class abstract which means we can't directly instantiate
them.
But when we derive a class from an abstract class we must override the pure virtual functions in the
base class in order to be a concrete class if we don't override all the virtual functions in the base
class then the derived class will also be abstract.
This is very useful when it does make sense for a base class to have an implementation but it does make
sense in concrete classes.
For example suppose we have a shape hierarchy.
The concept of a shape is too general or too abstract to have shape objects in our system so we can
define the draw method as a pure virtual function in the Shape class and that not only makes it an abstract
class but it also forces all derived classes to implement the draw method if they want to be concrete
classes and we can say the same thing for the defend method in a player class.
Here we see an example of a shape hierarchy.
Suppose we're creating a simple application that allows us to draw and manipulate shapes on the screen.
The shapes that we would be drawing in manipulating would be lines circles squares and probably many
others.
So we will have circle objects line objects square objects and so forth.
Would we ever have a shape object know a shape object is just an abstraction that we can use as a base
class if we declared to pure virtual functions.
Draw and rotate in that shape class then all derived classes must override these methods or they will
also be abstract.
You can see in this class hierarchy that shape open shape and close shape are all abstract classes.
Since their names are italicized and line circle and square are concrete classes.
Here's the partial code for the Shape class.
Notice the declarations for the pure virtual functions.
It makes no sense to provide implementations for draw and rotate in the shade class since we have no
idea how to draw or rotate the abstraction shape.
We'll leave that up to our concrete classes.
In this example we drive a circle from a shape.
If this class overrides the draw and rotate virtual functions then it becomes a concrete class and we
can instantiate circle objects.
In this case we're overriding the pure virtual functions.
So the circle class is a concrete class so remember abstract base classes cannot be instantiated directly.
If we create a shape object shape the compiler will give us an error.
Also if we create a shape object dynamically on the heap we will also get a compiler error but we can
use base class pointers and references as we've already learned to achieve dynamic polymorphism and
have some very powerful reusable and flexible class hierarchies.
Notice that PTO is a pointer to a shape and then we create a circle object on the heap and point to
it from Peter.
Now we can call draw and rotate via the pointer.
How do we know this will work.
Well it has to because all concrete classes derive from shape must have overridden the draw and rotate
methods.
That's pretty awesome.
Let's head over to the ID and see an example that uses pure virtual functions and abstract base classes.
So I mean the idea I mean the Section 16 workspace in the pure virtual functions project.
What I've done here is I've created a shape hierarchy and I'm using pure virtual functions to establish
an abstract base class.
So let me walk you through this and then what we'll do is we'll run some examples.
When we write a main and we'll create some shape objects and call some of the methods so that you can
see exactly how this works.
OK so here's my Shape class.
Notice that the Shape class has these two pure virtual functions one is called draw one is called rotate.
That makes this class shape an abstract class.
In this case it's going to be an abstract base class because I'm going to derive from it I cannot instantiate
shape objects.
I can't say shape s can I can't say I can't even go out through a pointer I can't say pointer p equals
new shape OK right.
I'm trying to create a shape object directly.
I can't do that.
So both of these will give me compiler errors in error I'll say something like.
You can't instantiate an abstract class or something like that.
Which which is a good error makes sense.
So that's my abstract base class.
Notice the virtual destructor always use that when you've got virtual functions perfect.
So now let's create an open shape an open ship would be a line of spline things like that in close shapes
would be circles and squares and so forth.
So here we're creating a class called Open shape.
Notice it's derived publicly from shape.
Also notice that I did not override those two virtual functions.
So that makes this class abstract.
I cannot instantiate open shape objects.
Same idea here.
Here I've got a close shape that's derived publicly from shape.
I am not overwriting those two methods.
You can see in the base class in here.
So this class again is an abstract class.
OK so now let's look at our concrete classes those are the ones that obviously know how to do things.
It makes no sense for me to write code here that draws a shape or rotates a ship.
I have no idea what a shape is right this is just an abstraction for a shape rotating a square versus
a line is very different and drawing a line versus a square is very different.
So the concrete classes are the ones that take care of that.
OK so let me scroll down just a bit to read two concrete classes right here.
So these concrete classes right here you can see I've got a line I've got the circle and I've got this
square right here.
So in this case I'm not deriving directly from shape I'm in line is an open shape so I'm taking advantage
of that.
It's a concrete class this time because you can see right here I'm overwriting both of those pure virtual
functions.
That makes me a concrete class.
Now I can have line objects.
Same with circle.
You can see here.
Circle is a closed shape and right here I'm overwriting those two pure virtual functions and then down
at the bottom you can see exactly the same thing with the square right here you can see that square
is a closed shape and I'm overwriting those two pure virtual functions so I can have square objects
out there.
OK so this is the same hierarchy that you saw in the slides that were displayed in the UML diagram.
Now let's write some code that will allow us to use these.
OK so let's write some code in the main we can start off by just trying to create a shape object and
create a shape object yes or we can come at it with a pointer just like we did a little bit ago.
We'll just call it P is in the shape and you can see that if I try to compile this it's not going to
compile.
There's a compiler error and says cannot declare variable as to be of an abstract type shape and same
thing here with this new shape.
I'm not allowed to instantiate shaped objects.
OK.
So we've seen that before and that's a function of those pure virtual functions.
The fact that they're in there makes the classes abstract.
I'll comment these two lines of code out and if we also tried to instantiate open shapes and closed
shapes we'd also get the same error because they are all so abstract classes.
Now suppose we create a circle right.
We can certainly do that.
We can say Circle C and we can call it draw.
We know it's there.
Now in this case.
So in this case you can see it says drawing a circle right.
But this is not coming at it with a base class pointer.
This is all being statically bound we're not using dynamic polymorphism here and that's ok sometimes
you want to do that but the real purpose of creating that abstract base class is so that we can come
at this class hierarchy with base class pointers or references.
So let me comment that code out as well and let's create a base class pointer.
So the base class in this example is shape right.
So we'll create a shaped pointer which is called TTR.
And what we'll do is remember I can't say new shape here but I can certainly instantiate derived concrete
classes.
So what I'll do is create a circle.
And now if I do draw or picture or rotate so you can see now that if I called the draw and rotate methods
through the base class pointer what's going to happen is we're having dynamic polymorphism So the function
call will be bound at runtime and we're going to call the draw on the rotate for the circle because
that's what I'm pointing to.
So if we run this we can see that we're drawing and rotating the circle which is pretty cool.
And now this is exactly what we've been doing before.
The only difference here is that we're using those pure virtual functions to define an interface if
you will at that base class level and all our concrete classes must implement those pure virtual functions.
Otherwise they are abstract themselves.
OK so let's look at a couple of other examples.
And you come at this out again real quick so it doesn't clutter up our display.
And let's just create a few shaped objects so let's say this create a few sharp objects through pointers
so let's say at Swanage and you circle
as to is a new line.
And finally we'll just say s three is a new square.
OK.
Now remember we've got all shaped pointers here at all base class pointers and what we're actually pointing
to are our concrete derived classes.
So that's pretty cool.
Now what we can do is let me write the code here to lead these guys down at the bottom so we definitely
don't want to leak.
OK so I've written the code to free up that allocated storage out at the bottom.
And now we're free to use these guys.
And now we're free to use these guys so what do we want to do.
Well why don't we put them in a vector and then loop through the vector and call each one of their shape
methods that say the draw method.
So let's create a vector.
And what does that factor have a vector of what my template parameter there will has to be a shape pointer
right.
It can't be a shape coming at it from a base class pointer.
So in this case I have a shaped pointer.
And again I'm using a raw pointer here in the shapes you got to be really careful when you do that in
the next section we'll learn about smart pointers.
You should probably be using a unique pointer here or a shared pointer but in this case this will be
this work just fine.
So there's my shapes.
And let's set it to one as two in history.
So there's my vector A.
It contains pointers to shapes.
And I've got all three of them in there.
And now what do we do.
Well let's loop through that vector.
Right so we use a range base for loop and we'll say for let's say Konst auto p p is going to be the
pointer to the shape and shapes.
And when I'm here I can just simply call piece draw.
That's it.
Simple as that.
If I run this now I should get three lines of output one for each of those objects.
So in this case I'm calling drawing a circle drawing a line and drawing a square.
So you can see that's pretty cool.
Imagine you have a collection of base class pointers and they're all pointing to objects on the screen.
Right.
All of those objects are going to be concrete objects.
And then let's say you want to refresh your screen.
What do you do when you just loop through that collection and say drudged radhe radhe radhe draw for
each one of those objects right.
And each one of them knows how to draw itself makes it super easy to think abstractly and think in the
general.
So why don't we actually do that why don't we write a function just a basic function right here we'll
call it let's say it's FOID It's called screen refresh.
OK.
So it's called screen refresh and what are we going to do what we're just going to pass that vector
into here and let the vector do its thing.
So Konst he insisted vector of shape based class pointers.
We'll pass it by reference so we don't copy it.
That's it.
Right.
That's pretty cool.
So now I'm going to say stood out.
Just say refreshing.
Just so we know it's being called
and now we'll just loop through that vector right.
So I'm going to say for Again same thing we did before for Konst we use OTOP again and shape's is my
collection.
And right here all I'm doing is P draw.
That's awesome.
I mean think about the power that we have here right.
Remember we're coming at this with an a vector of base class pointers so we know we've got dynamic polymorphism
kick in and we know that each one of those derived classes that are concrete most have implemented draw.
So I can simply call this while we're worrying about what I'm pointing to.
So I know it will be bound correctly at runtime.
And all we need to do now is let's come at this loop out here and let's just call that screen refresh.
It will pass in the shapes vector
and there you go.
Refreshing drawing a line circle drawing a line drawing a square.
That's pretty cool.
So you can see the real power here.
And again the real power of the pure virtual functions is to really force all your derived concrete
classes to implement those methods.
Now you know that they must be implemented.
So you can create base class pointers and just call any of those guys and you know that they're there.
They have to be there.